# Explaining the Trash Crisis in Baltimore
By: Mofe Barrow, Angie Lao, Tiffany Thomas

Does Baltimore have a trash crisis? After conducting an in-depth analysis, we found certain hotspots where the city can improve on trash disposal locations and services. Through addressing this issue with solutions proposed below, millions of taxpayer dollars can be saved each year.  

# Why is this challenge a problem?

President Trump began attacking Representative Elijah Cummings in a series of tweets in July 2019, which led to an attack on the “rat-infested” Baltimore City. We were hence inspired to dig deeper and see if Trump’s claims were substantiated by any data. In an article by the Baltimore Sun in June 2019, an estimated 10,000 tons of trash are illegally dumped in Baltimore every year. In FY 2018, the Department of Public Works released a report stating their government expenditures were at $22,666,770 on right-of-way cleaning services, which includes street and alley cleaning, mechanical street sweeping, marine operations, graffiti removal, and cleaning of business districts. From a public health perspective, it is crucial to prioritize the environmental health and safety of this city because illegal dumping and other forms of environmental pollution can lead to contaminated water, health hazards, increased spread of disease, and unattractive areas that deter investment. This problem is most relevant to Baltimore residents, as it affects Baltimore’s public image (as seen by the political ramifications of Trump’s tweets), but it also affects residential/commercial owners, the public sector, tourists, and residents living near dumping zones or alleys. If no action is taken, By identifying specific Baltimore regions with higher prevalence of environmental issues--such as illegal trash dumping and inability to dispose correctly--then we can implement better plans to help those highly affected regions, and preserve the beauty and safety of a cleaner Baltimore City. 

# Our Solution

Our business question is analyzing whether or not Baltimore has a trash problem. Based on our data analysis, the highest number of citations occurred under ‘high grass and weeds’ and ‘trash accumulation’. To identify the geographic locations of specific city council districts with the highest citations, Districts 12 and 13 had the highest number of citations; District 12 had the highest of “dumping under 25lbs of waste on public property”, whereas District 13 had the highest in the categories of “high grass and weeds” and “trash accumulation”. 
After identifying ‘high grass and weeds’ and ‘trash accumulation’ as the most common citations in Baltimore city, we chose to focus on the “trash accumulation” category to answer our business question because it is the most relevant. After performing linear regression to analyze the trends of trash accumulation from 2004-2019, 60.03% of our data was explained by the linear regression, which shows there is an increase in the citation frequency. 
With this data, we reached our business answer: while Baltimore has issues with trash accumulation and disposal in certain “hot spots” throughout the city, we still need to acquire more environmental data (inaccessible to us at this time) from other cities in order to measure the true severity on a city-wide basis. Additionally, we identified certain districts with the highest number of citations, but we must consider that different districts have varying populations, leading to different amounts of trash. In addition, there may be trash that is unaccounted for simply because citations were not given out.

# Future Suggestions

The call to action is that Baltimore needs to increase accessibility of proper trash disposal locations/services through policy change and social initiatives. Through policy changes that enable more frequent weekly trash pick-ups or add additional trash disposal locations in high risk trash neighborhoods, residents will be more likely to dispose trash properly and reduce the detrimental impacts of trash accumulation. In addition, Baltimore can increase awareness of proper trash disposal behaviors, and can work with the Bloomberg School of Public Health to initiate a city-wide public health campaigns around trash accessibility. 
The people of Baltimore will be have more pride in their city knowing that it will no longer be called a “trashy” or “disgusting...mess”. Residents will see their health improve with less harmful trash in their surroundings. By removing Baltimore’s “trashy” label, this city may see an increase in tourism and outside commerce which can lead to increased revenue and economic opportunities. 

# Data Analysis

Files with our accumulated and filtered data can be found under our repository main page.
